---
title: "“Pilates changed my life”: the head of the Kardashian-Jenner clan is about sports"
description: "Kris Jenner made a fortune of $200 million helping build her daughters' businesses and starring in TV shows. Here's How an Entrepreneur Raises Successful Kids, and How She Takes Care of Herself Under Huge Workload."
author: 
- Olga Kiseleva
date: 2022-11-22T09:29:31+08:00
lastmod: 2022-11-22T09:29:31+08:00
images: 
- "https://i.ibb.co/J5FY2hs/756663088300443.jpg"
caption: "Photo: Jason Merritt/Getty Images"
videos:
interest:
- Health
topic:
- Healthy lifestyle
- business guru
tags:
collection:
---

About sports and nutrition
--------------------------

Successful entrepreneur, producer and media personality Kris Jenner (in her first marriage - Kardashian) raised six children. Now she is responsible for managing 15 different brands of her daughters: for example, Kim Kardashian launched Skims, a $3.2 billion lingerie and clothing brand in 2019, and Kylie Jenner created her own cosmetics line, Kylie Cosmetics, in which she had a stake a few years ago. Bought by Coty for $600 million. The entire star family is known for the American reality show "Keeping up with the Kardashians", which lasted 20 seasons until 2021, aired 285 episodes.

Although Jenner devotes a lot of time to the affairs of children, she does not forget to take care of herself in order to always stay in great shape. She believes that health should be a priority.

Jenner is mindful of rest and believes that it is important to get good sleep in order to feel good. She tries to sleep six or seven hours. “I used to get four to five hours of sleep, but the older I get, the more sleep I need,” she notes. At the same time, the entrepreneur wakes up very early and starts her day with a cup of coffee.

“I get up at 4 or 5 every morning. I sleep little and try to do more things in the morning. I draw up a plan, make sure everything goes as planned while I'm on the treadmill,” she says. Jenner runs for 45 minutes to an hour while watching the news. Cardio training helps her emotionally and physically prepare for the challenges of the new day. “The more I play sports, the stronger I feel and the better I work,” she notes.

The entrepreneur also practices Pilates in order to be more resilient and energetic. “Pilates is one of the best things I have ever done. He's great with his stretch marks, which is something I've never done before. He changed my life,” says Jenner.

She tries to stick to a healthy diet and eat fresh fruits, vegetables, lean meats and cereals. Personal chef Rocco Dispirito has developed a special diet for Jenner. A sample menu looks like this: a protein shake for breakfast, salmon salad for lunch and roast for dinner, and a healthy snack. It is believed that such nutrition helps to quickly reduce weight.

About education
---------------

Jenner devotes so much time to managing her children's business that she even coined the term "momager" (from the English mom - "mother" and manager - "leader") and registered it as a trademark. “I help my kids figure out what they want to do, help them launch businesses, build infrastructure, and focus on what matters,” she says. By agreement with the children, the entrepreneur receives a share of the proceeds of their business: “I told the children:“ I will invest in this business with all my heart and soul, I will work hard. And take 10% so that my efforts pay off. Taking into account the many houses, as well as earnings from TV shows and deductions from daughters' companies, the entrepreneur's fortune is estimated at $ 200 million.

Jenner's efforts are not in vain - absolutely all daughters have achieved tremendous success. “Raising kids and saying goodbye to them at 18 is not for me. I was able to create the best family relationships that I can. All my girls have gone through a stage where they push their parents away, but the main thing is family relationships. I cherish them,” says Jenner.

She believes that the key to a good relationship with children lies in the attention of parents. “You just need to listen, pay attention, speak openly with them. They are all my best friends,” says the TV star. In her opinion, it is important to teach children sincerity by example. Jenner has cried on camera more than once and shared many personal moments on the show. This is how she shows the children that it's okay to be honest about your feelings, even if it's not easy.

The entrepreneur in matters of education is quite strict. “You live in my house by my rules” - this is the principle she adheres to. Jenner believes that the parent is in charge while the children are small. If an important event is coming up or some kind of problem has arisen, Jenner organizes a big family council. When the family goes through difficult times, she always reminds her daughters to stick together. Although she herself does not always agree with the decisions and behavior of the children, but if they get into an unpleasant situation, she is ready for any measures to make up for their bad reputation.

Jenner does a lot for her daughters, but they are not always happy with her actions. Jenner once admitted that the children repeatedly tried to fire her from the position of their manager. “Only one Kourtney seems to have wanted to do it three or four times, and that’s in just one day,” she laughs. However, if a woman is not right, then she admits this and calmly treats criticism from children.

_Sources: CNBC, Forbes, Daily Mail, Entertainment Tonight, romper, US Weekly, Medium, Insider (formerly Business Insider), Female First._

{{< footer >}}
_**The material is for informational purposes only:** We are not responsible for decisions made on the basis of the specified data_
{{< /footer >}}